---
layout: simple
---

Torquato Tasso (1544-1595) was arguably the most prominent poet of
late 16th-century Italy. His works, most notably the epic poem
*Gerusalemme liberata* (Jerusalem Delivered), achieved tremendous
fame in literary circles, shaping the poetic culture of the time.
Tasso’s influence extended also well beyond the literary realm.
Indeed, his poems became a source of inspiration for visual artists
and, most importantly, for composers, among whom they became true
hits. From the 1570s through the 1630s, virtually all composers of
secular vocal music in Italy and Europe, including notable ones
like Luca Marenzio and Claudio Monteverdi, set one or more of his
poems, producing a total of over 650 settings. Composers were
especially drawn to Tasso’s lyric poems, collectively known as
*Rime*, whose conciseness and wit reflected the taste for *concettismo*
typical of the time and offered opportunities for equally clever
musical renditions, but also proved fond of Tasso’s *Gerusalemme*
and the pastoral drama *Aminta*, whose dramatic features resonated
with a growing tendency toward quasi-operatic styles in secular
vocal music around 1600. As with most of the repertoire from this
time period, however, the majority of the settings, over three
quarters, are unavailable in modern editions. As a result, this
significant corpus of works has remained largely unexplored in both
scholarship and performance, which has in turn hindered a serious
assessment of Tasso’s influence on early modern musical culture.

Carried out by a team of scholars from the US and Europe, with the
technical support of the Stanford University’s Center for Computer
Assisted Research in the Humanities (CCARH) and the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, the Tasso in Music Project aims to fill this
lacuna by creating a complete digital edition of the extant late
16th- and early 17th-century settings of Tasso’s poetry. Funded by
a $260,000 Scholarly Editions and Translations Grant from the
National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), the project provides
open access to one of the largest digital repositories of early
modern music. Representing the work of over 200 composers from a
variety of geographic areas and with different musical styles, this
repository represents a snapshot of secular vocal music in a age
in which it underwent profound transformations and will allow users
to trace influences and patterns of emulation among composers,
especially for settings of the same poems. In addition to accessing
critical editions of this repertoire, users of the Tasso in Music
Project are able to browse and analyze it both quantitatively and
qualitatively through innovative musical search tools embedded in
the digital platform. The project features also a substantial
literary component, with transcriptions of the poetic texts as they
appear in the musical settings and in contemporaneous literary
sources, both manuscript and printed, and tools for the dynamic
visualization of literary variants across sources. This textual
component is indispensable for an understanding of the transmission
and dissemination of Tassian literary sources in musical environments.

Through its musical and literary content, as well as through its
digital features, the project aims benefit a wide audience encompassing
music historians and theorists, performers of early music, literary
scholars and philologists interested in the dissemination and
reception of Tasso’s works, and more generally scholars of the early
modern period with an interest in the intersection of music and
poetry.

For further information on how to use the website, please click on
the tab “How to use TiMP” at the top of this page. For information
about the editorial and encoding methods of the project, please
visit the page “[Editorial Policies](/about/policies).” Any queries
can be directed to the Project Director and General Editor, Emiliano
Ricciardi, and to the Project Technical Director, Craig Sapp, through
the FEEDBACK button at the bottom of the page. We hope that you
will find the project useful to your endeavors, scholarly and
otherwise, and look forward to your feedback.

Emiliano Ricciardi (University of Massachusetts Amherst), Project Director and General Editor

Craig Sapp (Center for Computer Assisted Research in the Humanities, PHI, Stanford University), Technical Director

<style>

#contents {
	padding: 100px !important;
	text-align: justify;
	text-justify: inter-word;
	line-height: 150%;
}

</style>


